feature: What's new in Kotlin 1.6.20 (#2854)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/whatsnew1620.md

* [Support for parallel compilation of a single module in the JVM backend](#support-for-parallel-compilation-of-a-single-module-in-the-jvm-backend)
* [Support for callable references to function interface constructors](#support-for-callable-references-to-function-interface-constructors)

### New @JvmDefaultWithCompatibility annotation for interfaces

Kotlin 1.6.20 introduces the [new annotation `@JvmDefaultWithCompatibility`](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/stdlib/jvm/src/kotlin/jvm/JvmDefault.kt#L53): use it along with the `-Xjvm-default=all` compiler option [to create the default method in JVM interface](java-to-kotlin-interop.md#default-methods-in-interfaces) for any non-abstract member in any Kotlin interface.

If there are clients that use your Kotlin interfaces compiled without the `-Xjvm-default=all` option, they may be binary-incompatible with the code compiled with this option.

> Before Kotlin 1.6.20, to avoid this compatibility issue,  [the recommended approach](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2020/07/kotlin-1-4-m3-generating-default-methods-in-interfaces/#JvmDefaultWithoutCompatibility) was to use the `-Xjvm-default=all-compatibility` mode and also the `@JvmDefaultWithoutCompatibility` annotation for interfaces that didn't need this type of compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before Kotlin 1.6.20, to avoid this compatibility issue, the [recommended approach](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2020/07/kotlin-1-4-m3-generating-default-methods-in-interfaces/#JvmDefaultWithoutCompatibility) was to use the `-Xjvm-default=all-compatibility` mode and also the `@JvmDefaultWithoutCompatibility` annotation for interfaces that didn't need this type of compatibility.
```

This approach had some disadvantages:

* You could easily forget to add the annotation when a new interface was added.
* Usually there are more interfaces in non-public parts than in the public API, so you end up having this annotation in many places in your code.

Now, you can use the `-Xjvm-default=all` mode and mark interfaces with the `@JvmDefaultWithCompatibility` annotation.

> This allows you to add this annotation to all interfaces in the public API once, and you won’t need to use any annotations for new non-public code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows you to add this annotation to all interfaces in the public API once, and you won't need to use any annotations for new non-public code.
```

Leave your feedback about this new annotation in [this YouTrack ticket](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-48217).

### Compatibility changes in the -Xjvm-default modes

Kotlin 1.6.20 adds the option to compile modules in the default mode (the `-Xjvm-default=disable` compiler option) against modules compiled with the `-Xjvm-default=all` or `-Xjvm-default=all-compatibility` modes.
As before, compilations will also be successful if all modules have the `-Xjvm-default=all` or `-Xjvm-default=all-compatibility` modes.
You can leave your feedback in this [YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-47000).

Kotlin 1.6.20 deprecates the `compatibility` and `enable` modes of the compiler option `-Xjvm-default`.

> There are changes in other modes’ descriptions regarding the compatibility, but the overall logic remains the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are changes in other modes' descriptions regarding the compatibility, but the overall logic remains the same.
```

### Support for parallel compilation of a single module in the JVM backend

> Support for parallel compilation of a single module in the JVM backend is [Experimental](components-stability.md).
> It may be dropped or changed at any time. Opt-in is required (see details below), and you should use it only for evaluation purposes.
> We would appreciate your feedback on it in [YouTrack](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-46085).
>
{type="warning"}

We are continuing our work to [improve the new JVM IR backend compilation time](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-46768).
In Kotlin 1.6.20, we added the experimental JVM IR backend mode to compile all the files in a module in parallel.
Parallel compilation can reduce the total compilation time by up to 15%.

Enable the experimental parallel backend mode with the [compiler option](compiler-reference.md#compiler-options) `-Xbackend-threads`.
Use the following arguments for this option:

* `N` is the number of threads you want to use. It should not be greater than your number of CPU cores; otherwise, parallelization stops being effective because of switching context between threads.
* `0` to use a separate thread for each CPU core.

> [Gradle](gradle.md) can run tasks in parallel, but this type of parallelization doesn't help a lot when a project (or a major part of a project) is just one big task from Gradle’s perspective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Gradle](gradle.md) can run tasks in parallel, but this type of parallelization doesn't help a lot when a project (or a major part of a project) is just one big task from Gradle's perspective.
```

Consider the following code:

```kotlin
interface Printer {
    fun print()
}

fun Printer(block: () -> Unit): Printer = object : Printer { override fun print() = block() }
```

With callable references to functional interface constructors enabled, this code can be replaced with just a functional interface declaration:

```kotlin
fun interface Printer {
    fun print()
}
```

Its constructor will be created implicitly, and any code using the `::Printer` function reference will compile. For example:

```kotlin
documentsStorage.addPrinter(::Printer)
```
{validate="false"}

Preserve the binary compatibility by marking the legacy function `Printer` with the [`@Deprecated`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-deprecated/) annotation with `DeprecationLevel.HIDDEN`:

```kotlin
@Deprecated(message = "Your message about the deprecation", level = DeprecationLevel.HIDDEN)
fun Printer(...) {...}
```
{validate="false"}

Use the compiler option `-XXLanguage:+KotlinFunInterfaceConstructorReference` to enable this feature.

## Kotlin/Native

> Kotlin/Native 1.6.20 marks continued development of its new components. We’ve taken another step toward consistent experience with Kotlin on other platforms:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kotlin/Native 1.6.20 marks continued development of its new components. We've taken another step toward consistent experience with Kotlin on other platforms:
```

* [Instantiation of annotation classes](#instantiation-of-annotation-classes)
* [Interop with Swift async/await: returning Swift's Void instead of KotlinUnit](#interop-with-swift-async-await-returning-void-instead-of-kotlinunit)
* [Better stack traces with libbacktrace](#better-stack-traces-with-libbacktrace)
* [Support for standalone Android executables](#support-for-standalone-android-executables)
* [Performance improvements](#performance-improvements)
* [Improved error handling during cinterop modules import](#improved-error-handling-during-cinterop-modules-import)
* [Support for Xcode 13 libraries](#support-for-xcode-13-libraries)

### An update on the new memory manager 

> The new Kotlin/Native memory manager is in [Alpha](components-stability.md). 
> It may change incompatibly and require manual migration in the future.
> We would appreciate your feedback on it in [YouTrack](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-48525).
>
{type="note"}

With Kotlin 1.6.20, you can try the Alpha version of the new Kotlin/Native memory manager.
It eliminates the differences between the JVM and Native platforms to provide a consistent developer experience in multiplatform projects.

> For example, you’ll have a much easier time creating new cross-platform mobile applications that work on both Android and iOS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you'll have a much easier time creating new cross-platform mobile applications that work on both Android and iOS.
```

The new Kotlin/Native memory manager lifts restrictions on object-sharing between threads.

> It also provides leak-free concurrent programming primitives that are safe and don’t require any special management or annotations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also provides leak-free concurrent programming primitives that are safe and don't require any special management or annotations.
```

Starting with 1.6.20, there is also a concurrent implementation for the sweep phase available for the new memory manager.
This should also improve the performance and decrease the duration of garbage collector pauses.

To enable the feature for the new Kotlin/Native memory manager, pass the following compiler option:

```bash
-Xgc=cms 
```

Feel free to share your feedback on the new memory manager performance in this [YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-48526).

### Instantiation of annotation classes

In Kotlin 1.6.0, instantiation of annotation classes became [Stable](components-stability.md) for Kotlin/JVM and Kotlin/JS.
The 1.6.20 version delivers support for Kotlin/Native.

Learn more about [instantiation of annotation classes](annotations.md#instantiation).

### Interop with Swift async/await: returning Void instead of KotlinUnit

> Concurrency interoperability with Swift async/await is [Experimental](components-stability.md). It may be dropped or changed at any time.
> You should use it only for evaluation purposes. We would appreciate your feedback on it in [YouTrack](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-47610).
>
{type="warning"}

> We’ve continued working on the [experimental interop with Swift’s async/await](whatsnew1530.md#experimental-interoperability-with-swift-5-5-async-await) (available since Swift 5.5).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've continued working on the [experimental interop with Swift's async/await](whatsnew1530.md#experimental-interoperability-with-swift-5-5-async-await) (available since Swift 5.5).
```

Kotlin 1.6.20 differs from previous versions in the way it works with `suspend` functions with the `Unit` return type.

Previously, such functions were presented in Swift as `async` functions returning `KotlinUnit`. However, the proper return type for them is `Void`, similar to non-suspending functions.

> To avoid breaking the existing code, we’re introducing a Gradle property that makes the compiler translate `Unit`-returning suspend functions to `async` Swift with the `Void` return type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid breaking the existing code, we're introducing a Gradle property that makes the compiler translate `Unit`-returning suspend functions to `async` Swift with the `Void` return type:
```

```kotlin
kotlin {
    androidNativeX64("android") {
        binaries {
            executable {
                binaryOptions["androidProgramType"] = "standalone"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Note that this feature will become the default in Kotlin 1.7.0.
If you want to preserve the current behavior, use the following setting:

```kotlin
binaryOptions["androidProgramType"] = "nativeActivity"
```

Thanks to Mattia Iavarone for the [implementation](https://github.com/jetbrains/kotlin/pull/4624)!

### Performance improvements

We are working hard on Kotlin/Native to [speed up the compilation process](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-42294) and improve your developing experience.

Kotlin 1.6.20 brings some performance updates and bug fixes that affect the LLVM IR that Kotlin generates.
According to the benchmarks on our internal projects, we achieved the following performance boosts on average:

* 15% reduction in execution time
* 20% reduction in the code size of both release and debug binaries
* 26% reduction in the compilation time of release binaries

These changes also provide a 10% reduction in compilation time for a debug binary on a large internal project.

> To achieve this, we’ve implemented static initialization for some of the compiler-generated synthetic objects, improved the way we structure LLVM IR for every function, and optimized the compiler caches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve this, we've implemented static initialization for some of the compiler-generated synthetic objects, improved the way we structure LLVM IR for every function, and optimized the compiler caches.
```

### Improved error handling during cinterop modules import

This release introduces improved error handling for cases where you import an Objective-C module using the `cinterop` tool (as is typical for CocoaPods pods).
Previously, if you got an error while trying to work with an Objective-C module (for instance, when dealing with a compilation error in a header), you received an uninformative error message, such as `fatal error: could not build module $name`.

> We expanded upon this part of the `cinterop` tool, so you’ll get an error message with an extended description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We expanded upon this part of the `cinterop` tool, so you'll get an error message with an extended description.
```

![iOS hierarchy example](ios-hierarchy-example.jpg){width=700}

The Kotlin toolchain provides the correct default dependencies, like Kotlin/Native stdlib or native libraries.
Moreover, Kotlin tooling will try its best to find exactly the API surface area available in the shared code.
This prevents such cases as, for example, the use of a macOS-specific function in code shared for Windows.

#### More opportunities for library authors

When a multiplatform library is published, the API of its intermediate source sets is now properly published alongside it, making it available for consumers.
Again, the Kotlin toolchain will automatically figure out the API available in the consumer source set while carefully watching out for unsafe usages, like using an API meant for the JVM in JS code.
Learn more about [sharing code in libraries](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-in-libraries).

#### Configuration and setup

Starting with Kotlin 1.6.20, all your new multiplatform projects will have a hierarchical project structure. No additional setup is required.

> * If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties:`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties`:
```
```suggestion
* If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties:`
```

> * If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties:`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties`:
```
```suggestion
* If you've already [turned it on manually](multiplatform-share-on-platforms.md#share-code-on-similar-platforms), you can remove the deprecated options from `gradle.properties:`
```

```properties
# gradle.properties
kotlin.mpp.enableGranularSourceSetsMetadata=true
kotlin.native.enableDependencyPropagation=true
```

* For Kotlin 1.6.20, we recommend using [Android Studio 2021.1.1](https://developer.android.com/studio) (Bumblebee) or later to get the best experience.

* You can also opt-out. To disable hierarchical structure support, set the following options in` gradle.properties`:

> ```properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```properties
```

> # gradle.properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # gradle.properties
```

> kotlin.mpp.hierarchicalStructureSupport=false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kotlin.mpp.hierarchicalStructureSupport=false
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```
```

#### Leave your feedback

This is a significant change to the whole ecosystem. We would appreciate your feedback to help make it even better.

Try it now and report any difficulties you encounter to [our issue tracker](https://kotl.in/issue).

### Kotlin CocoaPods Gradle plugin

To simplify CocoaPods integration, Kotlin 1.6.20 delivers the following features:

* The CocoaPods plugin now has tasks that build XCFrameworks with all registered targets and generate the Podspec file. This can be useful when you don't want to integrate with Xcode directly, but you want to build artifacts and deploy them to your local CocoaPods repository.

>   Learn more about [building XCFrameworks](multiplatform-build-native-binaries.md#build-xcframeworks).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  
  Learn more about [building XCFrameworks](multiplatform-build-native-binaries.md#build-xcframeworks).
```

        version = "1.0"
        name = "MyCocoaPod"
        extraSpecAttributes["social_media_url"] = 'https://twitter.com/kotlin'
        extraSpecAttributes["vendored_frameworks"] = 'CustomFramework.xcframework'
        extraSpecAttributes["libraries"] = 'xml'
    }
}
```

See the full Kotlin CocoaPods Gradle plugin [DSL reference](native-cocoapods-dsl-reference.md).

## Kotlin/JS

Kotlin/JS improvements in 1.6.20 mainly affect the IR compiler:

* [Incremental compilation for development binaries (IR)](#incremental-compilation-for-development-binaries-with-ir-compiler)
* [Lazy initialization of top-level properties by default (IR)](#lazy-initialization-of-top-level-properties-by-default-with-ir-compiler)
* [Separate JS files for project modules by default (IR)](#separate-js-files-for-project-modules-by-default-with-ir-compiler)
* [Char class optimization (IR)](#char-class-optimization)
* [Export improvements (both IR and legacy backends)](#improvements-to-export-and-typescript-declaration-generation)
* [@AfterTest guarantees for asynchronous tests](#aftertest-guarantees-for-asynchronous-tests)

### Incremental compilation for development binaries with IR compiler

> To make Kotlin/JS development with the IR compiler more efficient, we’re introducing a new _incremental compilation_ mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make Kotlin/JS development with the IR compiler more efficient, we're introducing a new _incremental compilation_ mode.
```

When building **development binaries** with the `compileDevelopmentExecutableKotlinJs` Gradle task in this mode, the compiler caches the results of previous compilations on the module level.
It uses the cached compilation results for unchanged source files during subsequent compilations, making them complete more quickly, especially with small changes.
Note that this improvement exclusively targets the development process (shortening the edit-build-debug cycle) and doesn't affect the building of production artifacts.

> To enable incremental compilation for development binaries, add the following line to the project’s `gradle.properties`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable incremental compilation for development binaries, add the following line to the project's `gradle.properties`:
```

```properties
# gradle.properties
kotlin.incremental.js.ir=true // false by default
```

In our test projects, the new mode made incremental compilation up to 30% faster. However, the clean build in this mode became slower because of the need to create and populate the caches.

Please tell us what you think of using incremental compilation with your Kotlin/JS projects in [this YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-50203).

### Lazy initialization of top-level properties by default with IR compiler

In Kotlin 1.4.30, we presented a prototype of [lazy initialization of top-level properties](whatsnew1430.md#lazy-initialization-of-top-level-properties) in the JS IR compiler.
By eliminating the need to initialize all properties when the application launches, lazy initialization reduces the startup time.

> Our measurements showed about a 10% speed-up on a real-life Kotlin/JS application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our measurements showed about a 10% speed-up on a real-life Kotlin/JS application.
```

> Now, having polished and properly tested this mechanism, we’re making lazy initialization the default for top-level properties in the IR compiler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, having polished and properly tested this mechanism, we're making lazy initialization the default for top-level properties in the IR compiler.
```

### Separate JS files for project modules by default with IR compiler

Previously, the JS IR compiler offered an [ability to generate separate `.js` files]( https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-44319) for project modules.
This was an alternative to the default option – a single `.js` file for the whole project.
This file might be too large and inconvenient to use, because whenever you want to use a function from your project, you have to include the entire JS file as a dependency.
Having multiple files adds flexibility and decreases the size of such dependencies. This feature was available with the `-Xir-per-module` compiler option.

Starting from 1.6.20, the JS IR compiler generates separate `.js` files for project modules by default.

Compiling the project into a single `.js` file is now available with the following Gradle property:

```properties
# gradle.properties
kotlin.js.ir.output.granularity=whole-program // `per-module` is the default
```

### Char class optimization

The `Char` class is now handled by the Kotlin/JS compiler without introducing boxing (similar to [inline classes](inline-classes.md)).
This speeds up operations on chars in Kotlin/JS code.

> Aside from the performance improvement, this changes the way `Char` is exported to JavaScript: it’s now translated to `Number`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aside from the performance improvement, this changes the way `Char` is exported to JavaScript: it's now translated to `Number`.
```

### Improvements to export and TypeScript declaration generation

Kotlin 1.6.20 is bringing multiple fixes and improvements to the export mechanism (the [`@JsExport`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.js/-js-export/) annotation), including the [generation of TypeScript declarations (`.d.ts`)](js-ir-compiler.md#preview-generation-of-typescript-declaration-files-d-ts).

> We’ve added the ability to export interfaces and enums, and we’ve fixed the export behavior in some corner cases that were reported to us previously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've added the ability to export interfaces and enums, and we've fixed the export behavior in some corner cases that were reported to us previously.
```

For more details, see the [list of export improvements in YouTrack](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issues?q=Project:%20Kotlin%20issue%20id:%20KT-45434,%20KT-44494,%20KT-37916,%20KT-43191,%20KT-46961,%20KT-40236).

Learn more about [using Kotlin code from JavaScript](js-to-kotlin-interop.md).

### @AfterTest guarantees for asynchronous tests

Kotlin 1.6.20 makes [`@AfterTest`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/kotlin.test/kotlin.test/-after-test/) functions work properly with asynchronous tests on Kotlin/JS.

> If a test function’s return type is statically resolved to [`Promise`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.js/-promise/), the compiler now schedules the execution of the `@AfterTest` function to the corresponding [`then()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.js/-promise/then.html) callback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a test function's return type is statically resolved to [`Promise`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.js/-promise/), the compiler now schedules the execution of the `@AfterTest` function to the corresponding [`then()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.js/-promise/then.html) callback.
```

The system property still works, but it will be removed in future releases.

The current priority of properties is the following:

* The task property `compilerExecutionStrategy` takes priority over the system property and the Gradle property `kotlin.compiler.execution.strategy`.
* The Gradle property takes priority over the system property.

There are three compiler execution strategies that you can assign to these properties:

| Strategy       | Where Kotlin compiler is executed    | Support for incremental compilation | Other characteristics                                                  |
|----------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Daemon         | Inside its own daemon process        | Yes                                 | *The default strategy*. Can be shared between different Gradle daemons |
| In process     | Inside the Gradle daemon process     | No                                  | May share the heap with the Gradle daemon                              |

> | Out of process | In a separate process for each call  | No                                  | -                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Out of process | In a separate process for each call  | No                                  | —                                                                      |
```

> Accordingly, the available values for `kotlin.compiler.execution.strategy` properties (both system and Gradle’s) are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Accordingly, the available values for `kotlin.compiler.execution.strategy` properties (both system and Gradle's) are:
```

1. `daemon` (default)
2. `in-process`
3. `ouf-of-process`

Use the Gradle property `kotlin.compiler.execution.strategy` in `gradle.properties`:

```properties
# gradle.properties
kotlin.compiler.execution.strategy=out-of-process
```

The available values for the `compilerExecutionStrategy` task property are:

1. `org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.tasks.KotlinCompilerExecutionStrategy.DAEMON` (default)
2. `org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.tasks.KotlinCompilerExecutionStrategy.IN_PROCESS`
3. `org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.tasks.KotlinCompilerExecutionStrategy.OUT_OF_PROCESS`

Use the task property `compilerExecutionStrategy` in the `build.gradle.kts` buildscript:

```kotlin
import org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.tasks.KotlinCompile
import org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.tasks.KotlinCompilerExecutionStrategy

// …

tasks.withType<KotlinCompile>().configureEach {
    compilerExecutionStrategy.set(KotlinCompilerExecutionStrategy.IN_PROCESS)
}
```

Please leave your feedback in [this YouTrack task](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-49299).

### Deprecation of build options for kapt and coroutines

In Kotlin 1.6.20, we changed deprecation levels of the properties:

> * We deprecated the ability to run [kapt](kapt.md) via the Kotlin daemon with `kapt.use.worker.api` – now it produces a warning to Gradle’s output. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We deprecated the ability to run [kapt](kapt.md) via the Kotlin daemon with `kapt.use.worker.api` – now it produces a warning to Gradle's output. 
```
